<p>*TEXT-PV010039 Tuesday 19 November 1968</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>

<p>PATIENT: (5-minute silence) I seem to repeat the same pattern each week. 
Because on Friday I remember thinking that everything was coming very
easily and even though I couldn't recall a lot of the things I was tying
together afterwards, at the time I remember the feeling that things were
making sense for me.  And over the weekend, when thoughts would occur to me
they all seemed very clear.  And, and yesterday I felt completely
frustrated at trying to express things.  I, I felt as if what I was trying
to express was elusive and words I was using weren't the words that did
express it.  And today I came in feeling I didn't have anything to say. 
And it just seems that every week I do this.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And when I do feel in that mood, that I don't have anything to say, I
find it very hard to even say what's in my mind.  And I have to keep
thinking, well how will I start when I do have something that I feel I'm
going to talk about.  And almost as if I'm concentrating more on my grammar
or just the choice of words.  Because I think sometimes I use certain
phrases as a way to get into a subject.  And when I'm this self-conscious
about saying anything, I hate to use those same phrases.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And the other thing my thoughts always do if I'm feeling in this mood
of not having anything to say is after I am silent for a while and so that
I'm not thinking quite so much on the fact that I don't seem to have
anything to say today, then I always go back to what happened at school and
sort of reliving different incidents.  And generally they're ones that are
of the same nature as what I was talking about yesterday and what I
recalled after the dance and just ones that I feel upset about or I think I
might have done something wrong or that at least things didn't work out. 
And it's very rare that I'll think about something that was nice. 
(2-minute silence) And every once in a while I'll think, when I'm thinking
about school, I'll just wonder if after Thursday, when I turn in the things
that I have to turn in, if then things will go better at school.  Because I
s—, I still feel that feeling of harassment or frenzy or whatever it is. 
And I still feel this tension in my head while I am at school.  And I've
always felt it at times but I've never, I can't remember ever having felt
it for such a long period as I have this time. </p>

<p>And usually it would get bad and then I'd just realize what I need is
to be sure I'd get some good night's sleep and just being aware of it I
usually can work it out.  But I have just, it's been weeks now that this
has gone on.  (Pause) And every once in a while I'll tell myself, well, it
seem, if, if it is because of the different things that all came together
(analyst coughs) and now what's left is the different things I'm doing for
my course, then it seems so ridiculous that it could take on such
importance that it could affect what I'm doing at school even when I'm
aware that that might be happening.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I don't let myself think about it too much but I think I am
feeling much more upset at this particular assignment than I do, than I
would at most because with most I would know that it just meant I'd have to
allow myself enough time and that I could do it but as long as I allowed    
myself enough time.  But with this one, he'd tried to leave the boundaries
loose enough so that we could do with it what we wanted.  But that just
makes me feel that I don't know what to do and, and I can't seem to direct
myself within it.  And I do have this, every time I'm working on it, I have
this horrible fear that I'm completely doing it wrong.  And it happens to
be an assignment of a fairly personal nature.  And he did say that he
wanted us to be honest.  But I have the feeling that I'm being way too
personal and it, and I just can't judge, again, if this is an answer to the
assignment or if, if I'm off again.  And, and the fact that I might be too
personal really bothers me.  (Silence)</p>

<p>And the other thing that makes me angry at myself, really, about how
I'm handling both this project and the reports on the conferences, and it's
something I used to do with all sorts of assignments and it's the way I
will make draft after draft and copy over and copy over.  And, because I
keep being afraid, well I might have done something wrong here or I might
have missed something.  And when I copy it over again then I get it.  And
this fear of ever having the final copy done until the deadline is so
obviously there that you just can't change it any more.  And I'll either do
it that way or else I'll go to the other extreme and leave the, leave the
paper to the last minute so that all I can do is 1 copy because there just
isn't time for anything more.  And it's almost then that I, even though I
might not do well in the eyes of my professor, I sort of can have the
excuse for myself that, well, I didn't have enough time and if I had done
another copy it would have been better.  And if I don't have that excuse,
then I just seem this, have this compulsion to work over it and work over
it and work over it until I just can't anymore. </p>

<p>ANALYST: I realized while you were talking that I don't have clear, eh, when
you were talking about the assignment, you mean in your class or is that
—? /</p>

<p>PATIENT: Well, both.  I have the assignment from my class is that —</p>

<p>ANALYST: That's separate from the reports that, eh, —</p>

<p>PATIENT: On the conferences, yes. </p>

<p>ANALYST: On the conferences, right.</p>

<p>PATIENT: That's for school. </p>

<p>ANALYST: So it was the assignment that was, that you were saying was very
personal?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Yes. </p>

<p>ANALYST: In what way?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Well, we, we're supposed to, uhm, give some kind of an account of the
experience we've had in class each time and the — because we're working
directly with different art media.  And we're supposed to, uhm, give some
account of what happened to us while we were working each evening and what
influenced what we were doing and then relate it to what we could do in our
own teaching.  And there are just, well, some of the things that I've
talked about here, that very definitely influenced me and I just can't tell
whether this is the kind of thing — it just seems to be very personal to
say we, in the, in the account, that the professor didn't look at my work
so I didn't think it had any value or something of that nature.  Or the
feeling that those around me were so much more able to handle the media and
had so many better ideas than I did.  (Clears throat) But these were things
that I do think were influencing what was happening to me.  And so I, I
suppose in a way it's a struggle of revealing that, myself that much and
presenting this picture of somebody that's, well, it's just not a very
attractive picture of a student.  And I think I'm also afraid of whether —
I know I do often make excuses like, well, I'd never done this before or, I
don't know, I've tried not to this year but I am inclined to try to make
sure that my teacher knows at what disadvantage I'm working.  And so I'm
afraid that in a way I'll use this as a means to do that.  And I don't want
to do that.  (Pause)</p>

<p>But just from the reading I've done for this course it does seem to me
that these very personal things that I do think about when I think of my
experience are what he would want us to note down.  And, and then, so, so
that it's this conflict in me and I keep arguing one way and then the
other.  And then finally I get to how I should be relating it to my
teaching.  And I feel well, I don't even know, in a way and then this will
(laughs) bother me.  I mean I, I am actually relating it but then I feel,
well, that's not much to say and I can't really make much of that in this
report.  Or I feel that what I've done is better than what I was doing and
it is something to say but that it's not enough.  And I haven't really
correlated my course to my teaching enough or carried it far enough so that
I should be doing more.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And this conflict over this goes further because I think the professor
really wants you to work it out in such a way that the writing up of these
experiences is most meaningful to you and that you do as much or as little
(clears throat) with each part as you feel the need to.  And, and, uh, and
then I'll argue that way.  And the next thing I know (laughs) I've got this
picture of him as being very critical of certain things that I think I'm
doing so — (silence)</p>

<p>And in a sense I'm really doing the same kind of thing when I wrote,
well, I've written up 1 draft of the conferences.  And again I'm not clear
exactly why my supervisor wants them.  I know she wants to be informed but
beyond that I don't know for what purpose she wants them so that I, I again
will debate whether or not to put something in and whether or not it would
be important to her for her purpose.  And then my natural inclination to
include everything in case I could be wrong if I didn't comes in.  So then
I think I'm including things that are quite inconsequential and she
wouldn't even want to be bothered knowing.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And the things about those, too, is that (clears throat) she didn't
give me a deadline when she wanted them.  And so I'm trying to make myself
do them and get them done so that I won't just string it out forever.  And
I also am afraid that someday she's going to look at me and say, "well, why
haven't you turned them in yet?"  And I, I think I fear her thinking or
saying to me that I was silly to go to so much work over them.  Because in
a way I do feel I'm being si—, silly to do so much with them.  (Pause) I
think the other thing I'm doing is after, I keep thinking, well, after
Thursday, then I'll be free and I can do all the other things that are sort
of backed up.  And the main thing that I keep thinking about are the
different letters that I should have written a long time ago.  And I
practically feel the same way thinking about having to do those or well,
it's almost having to, I want to communicate with some of these people but
then I, I still have the feeling that it's having to write the letters. 
And I create the same pressure for those, almost, that I do for all these
other things.  Except for, for the letters nobody is going to be standing
over me, saying that here's the deadline.  So I just never seem to get them
done.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And it really is, that is all part of a pattern I have of just
procrastinating on everything until the thing gets so complicated or the
job gets so big that, unless it absolutely has to be done, I won't do it. 
And I was thinking right then about balancing my checkbook.  And this is
something that my mother made a big issue of when I was first starting with
a checking account.  And so in a way it was her making me do it that got me
to do it.  There was absolutely nothing about my feeling it should be done
or my feeling that it was something I wanted to do.  It was just simply my
mother saying, "well, now do your checkbook."  And once she wasn't there to
make me do it I just stopped doing it.  And I think the last year or 2 I've
begun to feel a little bit more on the need of doing it and wanting to do
it for, just for myself.  But I let things pile up to the point that I just
have too many statements to check on and, and so I'll say, well, I'll do it
another time when I have more time.  And I just never do it.  (Silence)</p>

<p>I suppose this is another aspect of my including everything and
anything I do, like the reports or the, uhm, paper I'm doing for the
course.  But I was just thinking about school again and how I'm driving
myself and driving the children and over planning each day and what I want
to do in the day.  And it does end up that I cut a lot out.  But even then
I leave a lot in that shouldn't be there and I drive myself and them to do. 
And that somehow I just, by putting too much in and then cutting out in a
different way, I have the wrong balance in the way the day goes and what we
do.  But it's this feeling of, I've got to include everything.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I, I, I don't know how much this is causing me to feel this way
but, uhm, later on in the year we give a test to the children to supposedly
check their readiness for reading.  And we've been experimenting at what
point in the year we think it's most valuable but unfortunately the
headmaster wants the same results if it's, no matter if it's done at the
end of the year or in the middle of the year or at the beginning of the
year.  And last year we did it earlier in the year and my class's results
weren't quite the same as the year before.  And some boys were lower than
at their actual ability.  And I don't know, just generally, they, there was
no feeling that I got that you, as a teacher, could judge how valid the
test had been for the child and just, anyway, that you could take it, well,
here is an area you hadn't prepared them as well for as you should have. 
And it was just this sort of feeling, well, you failed, look at these
terrible results.  And I think this is pressing on me too.  Because I'm
inclined to react this way anyhow and then to have it actually a situation
where somebody else is feeling the way I'm always afraid they'll feel, it
just, it makes me feel very frantic beforehand and it makes me feel very
defensive once I do have the results from the test.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And last year, when I was going through that, even though I knew what
my own attitude was about the test and I knew that I didn't agree with the
headmaster's attitude about getting the proper curve no matter what and I
knew that my supervisor that year was, in a way, protecting herself, her
reputation because she was the one who tested the boys and supposedly she
should have chosen boys who would give this wonderful curve, I still
reacted as if I were wrong and they were right.  And it just didn't seem to
do any good when I would tell myself in e—, in effect that well, look at
what they're doing and they're not right.  I would still feel inside,
really, that they were right.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And sometimes I've thought well, what is it I'm afraid of?  You know,
I, I would think well, so what if they feel this way because I do think I'm
right and if I would just stop talking and being so defensive and just
listen and then still assert my position, what could happen to me?  And
sometimes I've thought that it wouldn't be the worst thing in the world if
I were not asked to come back.  But yet I still have this feeling of, what
if I'm not asked to come back, even if I didn't want to come back, the fact
that I wasn't asked to come back bothers me.  And even though I don't agree
with quite a few of the ideas that the school is run on, I still want to
please the people who hold them.  And I think last year, well the
supervisor I had was in many ways quite weak and there were times when I
did feel that I knew enough of what I was talking about so I did maintain
my position.  And the, but there, but they were so far in between, there
was just about 1 or 2 times.  And there were so many occasions when I was
so angry at myself last year for being scared by her or by the headmaster
through her and by what would happen to me if I displeased somebody. 
(Silence)</p>

<p>I think sometimes, too, the confusion I have about how I want to run
my class must come from this fear of displeasing the headmaster again. 
Because I always have in mind, what if he walks in, which he does quite
frequently, and things aren't the way he wants them.  So I never really
will experiment with the class in the way that would probably lead to my
finding out how I did want it to be.  And I, one of the things I was just
thinking today that seems to be uppermost in my mind, even though I want
them to feel a certain freedom and lack, a lack of a need to please me in
everything they do, I still want the feeling that when I give a command
really, it's about all it is, or call for their attention, I want them to
do it immediately.  Because if he's in the room and they don't do it
immediately, I'll be terribly embarrassed and it'll just look chaotic and
I'll feel awful.  And so I'm trying to create this freedom and then yet
practically train them like the military at the same time.  (Pause) But
then sometimes, knowing how, or feeling pressure from the headmaster or
from his attitudes, I think sometimes I use that, if I am uncertain about
how to do something, I will just say to myself, well, it has to be this way
because that's the way he wants it and, and sort of an easy way out, too. 
And it is another way to avoid responsibility for what happens.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And there is this conflict, too.  I was just thinking about the fact
that so often I think how nice it would be not to have responsibility for
things and there are so many little ways that I do convince myself that I'm
avoiding the responsibility for things.  And yet, this, the lesson, one of
the lessons my parents taught is that we should want to take on
responsibilities and that the more intelligent a person is and the better
educated, the more responsibility they should take on.  And almost, if
you're not doing your duty in your responsibility, fulfilling your
responsibilities, then you shouldn't feel fulfilled as a person.  So I'll
often go through periods when I do avoid it and then I'll be very
dissatisfied.  And I'll have to assume it again.  And I think in particular
of when I got married, I just felt, with MSCZ's really encouraging me to
feel this way, that teaching high-school would be too much responsibility
at that time, just because of the way I take pressure.  And so I did look
for a, for a part time job.  But then this one was about all that came up
while I was looking because I had to use my spring vacation to look.  And I
was afraid of taking it because it did seem to me that it was like, it was
avoiding responsibility.  And then there are other reasons but that was
one.  But then when I did have it there were times when the thing I liked
best about it was simply because I didn't have the responsibility for
things.  And so I was free to develop projects of my own, or little areas
and to feel no responsibility beyond that.  But of course, even then I
would way overdo my efforts within the projects I did develop.  But then I
began to feel uneasy about this and so finally I had to think to myself
that I either would stay in teaching and take on the full responsibility or
that I would leave teaching.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And then, I think this functioned, too, the way I was in high-school
and at college, because at high-school I don't remember really wanting to
be in any clubs or activities.  I did like going out to afternoon sports
but other than that I don't think there was anything I really wanted to do. 
But I sort of felt driven to accept responsibility, committee work or other
types of jobs, almost as if I couldn't respect myself if I didn't.  And the
same thing happened at college, that I somehow felt that I wasn't going to
be doing all that I should be doing if I didn't get into positions where I
had responsibility.  (Pause) And of course, some that, too, probably comes,
that if, if it is a position of being asked to, or being elected to it,
then you feel accepted or on the inside and that probably was part of it
too.  But when I'm thinking about some of the things I did, I just don't
know whether I liked doing them at all or not. </p>

<p>ANALYST: Well, our time's up.</p> 
