<p>*TEXT-PV010040 Wednesday 20 November 1968</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>

<p>PATIENT: (3-minute silence) I'm thinking (clears throat) of something which
still seems sort of vague in my mind but it's related to how I had to
anticipate wearing my boots way before I did and what I'd do if I wore
them.  And it's something that I can see that's somehow related to the
attitude I approach a lot of new things with or, well, I guess it's mainly
new things: sort of the having to experience all the fears that I have
about it or (sniffle) anticipate how I'll react to different situations. 
Because I don't seem to trust my judgment when I am in them.  And if I
haven't, when I'm in a situation, if I haven't anticipated something then
afterwards I'll think about how I use my judgment.  And it seems that I
find fault with it.  I'm not too sure exactly what there is in this but
when I was coming here it just suddenly occurred to me, well, I'm just
going to take my boots off and this, it's just very simple.  And, but
there's no reason why I couldn't have met the problem when it existed and,
and not before.  Because there's nothing complex about it.  And it
suggested to me that somehow I do make everything much more complex than it
is but I can't quite see yet what the relationship is between this and my
approach to other things.  It's sort of a case of feeling something and not
being able to pin it down.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And it, it's part of an attitude I've always had (sniffle) which I
suppose is a pessimistic kind of an attitude.  First of all because it
assumes that something will go wrong so it makes it worth thinking about
all the things that could go wrong.  But beyond that, too, it, I was aware
that I was doing it and I would try to think of everything that could make
me unhappy about a new situation so that then when I was in it, I couldn't
be anything but pleasantly surprised.  I remember I, the first time, I
think, that I consciously did this was when I was, uhm, oh, I guess a
sophomore in high-school, the first time I went skiing for the week to the,
uhm, place in PSP that was owned by my father's classmate.  And I think I
knew that there would be other young ch—, people up there.  And I was very
afraid of this because I kn—, I wouldn't know any of them ahead of time. 
And I was just going with my older sister.  And so I tried to think of all
the things that could be unpleasant.  And I was so totally prepared for a
horrible time that then when I had a nice time, it seemed doubly nice. 
(Pause)</p>

<p>And it's all part of this aspect that I have about well, 1 word I
suppose would be worrying about things.  But it used to make me feel very
upset when people would say, "don't worry about it.  Don't worry about
that."  Or "don't be such a worrier."  My mother and my elder sister,
particularly, I can think of saying it to me.  And I don't know why it
would upset me that they'd say it because in a way I had to admit that I
knew I was that way.  But I think it was partly a sense that somehow there
was a distinction there they weren't making and that it wasn't something
that I had the feeling of control over.  And "worry" seemed to be just the
wrong word, that it was a fear almost or I don't know, something that if
they had known that it was what I sensed that it was, that they wouldn't
just sort of offhandedly say, "well, don't worry about it." (Pause)</p>

<p>And it's funny.  Thinking about my boots, it just occurred to me that
whatever I did do with them I would feel ridiculous and the worry that if I
left them on I would feel ridiculous and I didn't want to go through the
process of taking them off.  But I think I feel sort of ridiculous with
them off, so either way I, there was no way to avoid feeling ridiculous.</p>

<p>ANALYST: You would feel ridiculous with them on in, in what way?  I mean,
what can you, what do you think about that?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Well, I suppose bec—, — you mean, what make, what would make me feel
ridiculous about it?</p>

<p>ANALYST: Yeah, right.</p>

<p>PATIENT: Uhm, the fact that I'd be lying down somewhere with boots on.</p>

<p>ANALYST: That seems to you ridiculous on the face of it, right?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Mm.  Well, again it's almost the part of this thing that I do on
establishing a certain procedure for everything, a working out of certain
procedure and, uhm, that there is only 1 right way to do things, and the
idea that when a person lies down they don't lie down with outside clothing
on or boots on and, in a way, even shoes on.  (Silence) My thoughts are
just gone all sorts of places.  But whenever I think about my need to have
a certain routine for things or a certain set way, I always think of this
boy in my class.  And that made me think of what he did today.  We had,
some of the children were fingerprinting and he just could not even do it. 
He just, I think it partly was because his mother has made him feel that he
gets all dirty and messed up when he uses it.  And I don't know, part of it
might be just the fact that it is a messy media (sic).  He's, he doesn't
like it but thinking about his experience with the fingerprinting made me
think about a reaction I had when we were working in clay last when it, I
guess it was the last time in class, my class.  At, uhm, KWNZ.</p>

<p>And I, well, I had some trouble really getting to the feeling of
working with clay.  But I don't know whether that was because I didn't
really want to get my hands all dirty or whether it was just not knowing
how to do it.  But then I saw some people really carefully smoothing their
clay and well, they spent practically half the period just sort of
smoothing it all out and doing that kind of a thing and it really bothered
me.  It bothered me to see them doing it and it bothered me to even think
that I might have to do it or want to do it or just m—, that I might even
do it.  And I couldn't quite figure out why I had such a strong reaction to
it because it was my choice whether or not I wanted to do it.  And, I don't
know, I just had a, it repulsed me and, and —</p>

<p>ANALYST: What was the smoothing like?  I mean, how was it done?</p>

<p>PATIENT: With the fingers.  You mean, what did it look like?  Or —</p>

<p>ANALYST: I don't quite have the picture of, ah — 
PATIENT: Oh, well, they had made an object out of the clay and then, in order
to get the surface completely smooth —</p>

<p>ANALYST: I see.</p>

<p>PATIENT: And even, they kept working over it.  And in a w—, it surprised me
because I would have thought I would want to spend a lot of time just
smoothing it out.  But it just occurred to me: there was a certain feeling
this, this clay gave you when you were smoothing it out because it would
begin to get a little dry and crumbly after a while.  And there was
something in that feeling that I found, I guess, particularly unattractive. 
And it is, in a way, connected with how dirt might feel if you were working
in wet dirt or mud, and then it began to dry.  And I've always hated that
feeling of dried dirt, or if I've worked with paints, the dried paints in
my, the skin of my fingers and the whole dried feeling in my fingers and
under my fingernails.  And I've always just found that very distasteful. 
So maybe it was a part of that.  But beyond that, I didn't, I didn't like
the look of what happened to the clay figure when it was smoothed out. 
(6-minute silence)</p>

<p>It's funny: as I am h—, lying here I'm thinking about something that
I don't want to talk about.  And I can just, it almost feels as if my body
is sinking and shrinking at the same time.  (Pause) And the thought is
something that just makes me feel sort ridiculous even if it is a very
natural kind of thing to think.  But it's the relationship — or, what came
to my mind after talking about the smooth clay was what a bowel movement
would look like and the fact that there must have been something in
reacting to the clay because of how I might rela—, react to a bowel
movement.  And it just, I don't know, it makes me feel awful even to think
that I was doing that.  (Pause)</p>

<p> And when I was thinking about the fact that I was going to have to
say, talk about that sometime because it obviously wasn't going to leave my
mind, I was thinking about sometimes the reaction I have to other things
and not wanting to say them.  And sometimes it's because it seems like kind
of a personal thing to talk about and therefore I'm hesitant.  But I think
sometimes it's because I'm, well, — or maybe it's because it is personal I
feel I have to use the right terms for it, or certain words for it.  And
I'm afraid I don't know the words.  Or else they'll be words that I know
exist but I can't think of that I'd prefer to use.  And so I'll almost for
an excuse say, well I won't say anything about it till I'm, I have the
right words for it.  And also because I think I'm, I'm afraid of feeling
ridiculous if I don't use the proper terms.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Some other than proper terms occurred to you?</p>

<p>PATIENT: No, but I felt that bowel movement wasn't proper.  And I couldn't
think of the word I wanted.  And I don't know how much it has to do with
something that I've done as far as I know all my life but I'll often not
hear or somehow the memory I have in my, the for, for recalling a word is
not correct so I'll mispronounce words.  And very often they make another
word and it isn't that I didn't know the right word but I'll somehow recall 
it incorrectly.  And my family has always made a lot of fun of me when I've
done that.  So even though I'll continue to do it in my family I get the
feeling of great fear that I might do it someplace else.  Because one
example of that and something that my brother and sisters will still recall
and laugh about is one time I wanted to say, "somebody filched my comb." 
And I said, "flinched my comb."  And they thought that was hilarious.  And
of course it embarrassed me.  But I'm, that's not the only time I've done
that kind of thing.</p>

<p>ANALYST: I'm sorry.  I didn't understand the last word.</p>

<p>PATIENT: Filched.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Eh, your —</p>

<p>PATIENT: Oh.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Filched your what?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Comb.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Comb, ah!</p>

<p>PATIENT: It's, it's — (pause) in fact I think this is something that just in
any kind of a conversation I'm always aware that I might say a word I don't
want to say so I'm watching, I'm thinking about the words I'm saying as
well as about the thoughts that I want to express.  And then I get so wound
up in that that words won't come to my mind at all.  Because I, I, it
always seems that I'm having to say or I'm feeling well, that I can't think
of the word I want for this.  (Pause)</p>

<p>Or else I'll be talking and a f—, few words after I've said something
or a few phrases after I've said a phrase, I'll realize that somehow I'd
said it wrong and it didn't make sense or that it wasn't what I had
intended to say.  And this hearing it a little bit afterwards where I'm
already in something else, makes me z____ z____ z____ z____ just I'll z____
z____ upset or else I'll lose the whole trend of what I was talking about. 
(Pause)</p>

<p>And somehow this, something else has always disturbed me that must be
a part of this in a way and that is the not only insecurity I've felt when
I'm meeting a new word when I'm reading something aloud but, uhm, well, I
don't know, just that I don't even know how to attack getting the right
pronunciation and using a dictionary if, if I'm going to a dictionary, and
just knowledge about words.  In fact, the only knowledge I have is from
what I've learned when I've done reading on how to teach reading.  And
although I still don't completely know how to do things, I've been amazed
at how simple some of the things really are.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And it's funny, too.  I've always wanted to have a rich vocabulary so
that you could, or that, so that I could find exactly the word I wanted for
every situation and, and express it well and in an interesting way.  And 
yet, when I've, when I read and especially when I was in high school and
probably college when I read, when I came across new words I would just
completely blank them out so I was hardly even aware that I was coming
across new words.  (Pause) And with all the reading I'd done, I had to work
at home with my mother on building my vocabulary before I took the college
boards because it was so bad.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I think I just blew up some kind of a real fear of the dictionary
that I could never make sense of it no matter how hard I tried.  And so
that even when I was reading with the intention of looking up words that
were new to me I wouldn't see them because I just hated going to the
dictionary.  And I think it was in seventh grade that we used to have
assignments in english class.  And I, I don't recall exactly what they were
but they somehow involved using dictionaries and, ah, probably finding
meanings of words and then using them in a sentence or finding a simil—,
another word, uhm, — can't think of the word now for that (laughs).  It
means the same.  And I would, I can remember getting practically hysterical
some nights because I just felt so confused and had no idea how I could get
myself out of the confusion.  And I th—, I've had a similar reaction to
other kinds of resource materials.  And, ah, again, I don't know exactly
why but I can recall in either fifth or sixth grade having assignments that
involved using encyclopedias.  And I, we weren't taught how to use the, we
were just supposed to use them.  Or else, if we were taught how to use them
I missed the lesson.  I, I mean, I didn't understand what we were being
taught so that again, I was just totally confused the whole time.  Or maybe
it was just a matter of something I should have been taught in, in reading
in how to select the main idea and, and how to paraphrase and assimilate
material so it was my own.  And I'd end up almost copying out of the
dictionary, knowing that that wasn't right either and feeling frustrated
that that was all I could do.  But again I used to just somehow feel
practically hysterical in trying to do these homework assignments.  And
even today I don't feel very confident about using a library or different
guides for looking up things and where to go to find out information.  I, I
just, that whole area I, I just hate because of some, some reason.  It must
be partly from these experiences.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I can remember both in high school and college when we had library
orientation classes, I guess they'd be, uhm, and we were told where
different types of books were and how they could be helpful to us, that I
would almost turn my mind off and not listen and I was, and I knew I need
to know these things and that I wanted to know them, in a way.  But in
another way I can almost feel now how I used to just tune out and not take
it in so that it would just reinforce this feeling that I didn't know how
to handle it or didn't know how to use a library.  (Silence) And I don't,
again I might be just being critical because it's a, another way to avoid
responsibility for myself.  But in thinking about my own school education,
it seems that concentration was always placed on knowing something or just
the facts and that there was very little time or no emphasis at all put on
how to do something and, and that it wouldn't matter what it was as long as
you knew how to do it because in the end you'd forget the things anyway or
you might have to relearn them.  And I can't tell whether I made it seem
that way or if it really was true but if it was true, or even if the
teachers did do some of it, I, I must have needed a lot more of it, perhaps
just for confidence.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And it was almost a case of I knew I had this need but I never sat
down and in a way taught myself, which I could have done.  Instead I used
to, probably, think in terms of, if I'm not made to do it then why bother. 
Because, somehow, when I did my senior thesis at ZDZ it entered into how I
wrote it.  And I don't know how much I was actually aware of in my
thinking, but I knew I couldn't write well and I didn't write that thesis
very well and I would have welcomed my advisors sitting down with me and,
and really tearing it to pieces and being horrible over it.  But if that
would help me learn how to write then I would have appreciated it.  But on
the other hand, even though I knew weren't going to sit down.  And I gave
them too much of the responsibility with this.  I didn't make any effort to
learn how to write better since they, because they were in the position of
assuming that by this point I did know how to write.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And of course, I don't, perhaps it wouldn't have done much good anyhow
because seems that some of the problems I have in writing are the same as
with everything else in the feeling that unless I go around in circles and
write the things over and over again I might have missed something and not
said it.  And I probably still would have felt that way even if they had
taught me a lot of the different principles involved in writing.  (Silence)</p>

<p>It's funny but I was just thinking about my reaction to your asking
what word I had said when I said, "comb" and the fact that somehow I
thought since you had asked it meant that I hadn't even used the right word
when I thought I used the right word and I'm no longer even certain.  And
at the time, I was aware of this but I didn't want to talk about it anymore
in case I had been wrong.  I just wanted to leave it.  (Pause)</p>

<p>ANALYST: Well, our time's up.</p>