<p>*TEXT-PV010044 Tuesday 26 November 1968</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>

<p>PATIENT: (3-minute silence) I realized when I left yesterday that I had a
certain kind of feeling of anger toward you.  And, at least that's the only
thing I can understand it to be.  And I think it somehow fits in with the
feeling I'd been having about coming here with all the ideas that I had
when I wasn't here and giving them to you, because somehow I expect that
you'll do something with them.  And yesterday I think I must have been
feeling angry because you weren't doing anything with them and I wanted you
to give me some direction, I think.  Or I do always, I guess.  (Pause) And
it makes me, when I realize this, it makes me feel as if I'm just a child
and I'm waiting to be told what to do.  And then of course, that disturbs
me too.</p>

<p>But it also makes me think of something else that I've always thought
I did.  I don't know now whether I really have.  But it's always seemed in
the past that I either have to feel complete responsibility and, and sort
of I'm, I'm the leader and everybody else has to do what I say or else I
have to be the follower or the one directed.  And I never seem, or have
seemed to be able to have some kind of a middle ground reach.  I, I never
can be making the decisions but working with other people on them, too.  I
don't know, maybe it's if I have excuse for not having total
responsibility, then I take advantage of it and I won't take any of it. 
(Silence)</p>

<p>It's funny: I didn't want to say how I'd felt toward you yesterday and
I was thinking about what about saying it bothered me.  Well, I suppose it
basically was just I was afraid that you would disapprove or be displeased. 
But I really felt afraid to say anything.</p>

<p>ANALYST: When did you become aware that you were feeling z____, yesterday?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Just when I left.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Hmm.</p>

<p>PATIENT: Or at least that's when it occurred to me.  (Pause) This made me think
of something else, which I started doing unconsciously and then I began to
do consciously.  Uhm, I've been reading a book recently and I think
unconsciously I didn't want you to know I was reading it so I would not let
you see.  And one day MSCZ saw that I was reading it and he said, well what
was you reaction to my reading that.  And I said, well, you didn't know, at
least, to my knowledge you didn't know.  And then I became aware that I'd
been, in a way, making it impossible for you to know and I couldn't quite
understand why I was doing that.  The book is, uhm, "Dibs, In Search of
Himself."  And I had read it before and then it, I thought this was
something I could read for my course.  And I began to again for that.  But
then I just began to â€” I realized I couldn't read it for my course: I'd
had another list by mistake.  And so I just continued to read it for my own
pleasure.  And I was just seeing it so differently the second time.  And I
realized I was concentrating much more on what, uhm, the therapist was
doing, not what the, was happening to the boy, as I had the first time. 
And, I don't know, for some reason that must have made me feel that I
didn't want you to know.  And I think in a way, too, it's, uhm, sort of
misdirecting my thoughts a little bit.  Or it's making me do what I've done
so often in my life: thinking about well, it's z____ not that way with me. 
And it seems to me now when I'm reading it again, how easy it is for the
boy to work things out and how he so quickly is getting at things and what
a wonderful child he is.  And then I'll just compare myself very
unfavorably to him and, and to his experience.</p>

<p>And I think sometimes I was thinking too, uhm, that with a child like
this it would be so much fun to do something with him and, and to have him
in therapy.  But then, of course, I was thinking how just I'm so ordinary
and just must be boring.  (Pause) And it just makes me realize, when I
think of how I reacted that way and how it's so close to my reactions to so
many things, that I really don't have any idea how people react to me and I
am so busy thinking about it and thinking of it in a negative way that I'm,
I just never think about what I am for what I want to be.  (Pause) And I
think I've probably already talked about this but it's the same feeling I
have when I'm in this course I'm taking.  And the professor is very careful
not to, or he tries very hard not to give any opinion of what you're doing
so that you will do something to please him.  And I have spent most of the
time there being totally confused because stressing pleasing yourself just
leaves me not knowing where I'm going.  And I just don't have any idea what
does please me or what it is I do want.  And it's the same feeling I get if
I think of having a lot of time where I am free just to be myself and to do
what I want: I just don't know.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And it, I was just thinking how lately my moods have fluctuated so,
ah, after realizing that I must have felt a certain kind of anger toward
you, when I got home I felt very happy.  And it was just, I wasn't aware of
feeling happy but I just suddenly realized that I did.  And it just seemed
like a strange feeling to come after feeling a certain lack of direction
and, disappointment isn't quite it, but disappointment to an extent, which
made me feel angry at you.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I had another funny reaction.  I, I think I'm thinking of it
mainly to get off this subject but, uhm, last night I spoke to my mother. 
And it turns out that FYC also went to PYKK to see my sister married, along
with my brother.  And for some reason, having everybody go but me upset me
quite a bit.  I didn't, I just wouldn't let myself think about it but all
along I know I thought, well, FYC's not going either so I don't mind not
going so much.  And I don't know whether it was a matter of well, somebody
else is not participating that made me feel that way, or I won't feel so
guilty because somebody else isn't, or just what it is that made me feel
like that.  But it did make me feel upset and, I think, guilty.</p>

<p>ANALYST: What did you feel guilty about?</p>

<p>PATIENT: That I hadn't shown enough caring or interest or something to leave
some of the things that were important to me to go to see her married when
I had the chance to.  (Pause) And then I felt I had missed something.  And
this was a feeling that I had for the first time, well it was the first time I'd really been away, but I'd had it most strongly the year I was in
PEC.  And they would write about the christmas they had or some other
gathering.  And at one point they took pictures so that I could sort of
share from where I was and it made me feel very funny.  Because first of
all, it seemed like they were having such a nice time and I would have
liked to have been part of it.  But I think there was a certain feeling
that I wasn't there and, and although they were very thoughtful to send me
all this, they had gotten along without me and still had a wonderful time. 
So that was sort of mixed in, too.  (Silence)</p>

<p>And then my mother said something which uhm, well, in a way, I mean,
it would be nice but it annoyed me too.  And it just reflects how they've
always treated us.  Ah, after she spoke of how they'd all gone, she said,
"And so we'll have to talk about your going over some time."  And it was
just this attitude of, you know, even, even for everybody.  And, although
the point is now passed, in a way, for my going or for why they would have
sent me, they still are feeling this way because they had brought both my
sister and my brother and probably mostly because they brought my sister. 
I don't know if they would have done this if it had just been my brother
who went.  And I think sometimes sort of vaguely I felt that they try to,
or tried to in the past, make up for other things by being absolutely fair
in what they spent on each of us and, just anyway, on spending on each of
us.  It was almost as if I knew that I, I could ask for things that in a
way they didn't feel they should give, that they would end up giving
because of their own guilt feelings and I could play on them.  Or I, just,
I got a car out of them when I was a senior in college.  And it started
with a car that they had they weren't using very much.  And then they went
to europe and they bought a new one and traded in the old one.  But in
effect, they really had bought me a car.  And I despised myself for doing
it and in a way I didn't really want that car at all because of what it
represented.  But on the other hand, I knew just how to work it so I could
get it.  And it just, I suppose in a way, proving to myself that I could do
it upset me more than anything.  Especially with my father, it was almost
like, "Well, this will make up for all the times that I've been angry at
you and for the times when I haven't been around."  And I don't know, it
just, that's his way to show any kind of affection, is to buy things.</p>

<p>And it's really kind of ludicrous now with my mother (laughs) because
he keeps giving her jewelry she'll never wear.  And it can be beautiful
jewelry but she just won't wear it.  And just the fact he's given it to her
makes him feel better for some reason and he doesn't seem to care that she
doesn't wear it.  (Pause) And it's sad, too, because I think my mother
would like to wear it but she doesn't really have the courage.  For
instance, she, the last thing he gave her that I remember is a, a diamond
necklace.  And it was such a thing that nobody could believe it was real. 
And I don't think she even was sure herself at first.  But he just got the
pleasure out of giving her something that she would be completely astounded
by.  And he's never inquired about it or wondered why she hasn't worn it. 
And I, and MSCZ and I sort of expected she would wear it at FYC's dance,
which was practically the only thing she's gone to she could wear it at. 
But it, as it turned out her dress wouldn't have been appropriate.  It
wouldn't have been appropriate with her dress.  And the, and I just happened, I asked her about it, and it was kind of mean of me to do it, but
I had been wondering.  And she said that, you know, it just wouldn't go
with that.  And so then I was really mean and I said, "Well, have you ever
worn it?"  And she said, no.  Or maybe she kind of equivocated and said,
"Well, maybe once," or something like that.  But then â€” this was the day
before the dance.  Then she went to my father and brought up the subject
that she wouldn't be wearing it because it was in the safety deposit box. 
And I don't know, I mean, it just showed he had absolutely no interest and
he didn't really make any comment or even show he knew what she was talking
about or cared.  And this makes it hard on her too because she almost needs
his support to wear any of these things.  Or especially something like
that.</p>

<p>But I just, in telling about it, I just realized I had some kind of
perverse pleasure out of the fact she wasn't wearing it and that everything
was so predictable.  Well, it might have come partly out of the fact MSCZ
and I talked about it and he was sure she'd wear it and I had said no, I
didn't think she would.  And so it made me feel I was right and I always
get some kind of unreasonable pleasure or the feeling I get when I am right
is way out of proportion to what the thing was that I was right about. 
It's almost that I have the feeling, well at least there are a few times
when I can know what I'm talking about or I can make a good guess.</p>

<p>And it gets so if MSCZ and I are having an argument about something
and I am just positive I'm right â€” usually I get so weak about it that I
give in â€” but if I'm positive I am right, I just get this feeling in me
that I, I just cannot give in or give any inch at all, that I can't even
compromise about it or just say, "Oh, oh well, what does it matter?"  Or
anything.  I mean, it just takes on too much importance and I just get too
tense about it and, well, something more than tense but I don't know what. 
(Pause)</p>

<p>But it's times like that, if he persists in saying that I'm wrong,
that I really, I really just want to attack him and hurt him and do
something horrible because it just makes me feel so awful.  (Pause) I
suppose in a way a similar type of feeling made me hit my mother that time
when she wouldn't step in between my, FYC and myself.  And I went to show
her what FYC had done and she didn't seem to be too interested.  And I felt
so justified in being very upset that I hit her more just to get rid of the
feeling in me than to show her what had happened.  (Silence)</p>

<p>It's funny, too, about that memory because well, nothing is really
that vivid in my mind but it, it does almost seem that the hitting of my
mother is the part that I remember most clearly and it's not the part where
my father sort of kicked and threw me in a closet, which in a way I would
have thought, would, I would have remembered more carefully or clearly. 
And it was a funny mixture of being very satisfied when I did it, when I
did hit her and also of being horrified that I had done it.  (Pause) And
another thing I've sometimes wondered about: having taught for a while now,
I, I can see that children's arguing and fighting and so forth can be
handled to a large extent by the adults in charge and that they can be
helped to see how to handle their own problems so that they don't need to fight and be nasty to each other and all that.  And then I think of my own
family life and how we were fighting all the time and how in a way my
parents didn't do anything about it.  And in fact, my father set a very bad
example for us.  But then they would both be sort of, "Well, why do you
children always have to fight when other people's children aren't
fighting?"  And just, they always just threw it back on us.  (Pause) And so
often, I think, in my relationship with my father it was this feeling of
his asking so much from me, anyway, in the kind of child I was going to be
and not giving me anything so that I could become anything that would
please him, and just sitting there waiting to receive this wonderful child. 
(Silence)</p>

<p>ANALYST: Well, our time's up.</p>  
