<p>*TEXT-PV010045 Wednesday 27 November 1968</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>

<p>PATIENT: (4-minute silence) I'm thinking of several things.  One is the, uhm,
way my feelings, well, fluctuate so just in regard to coming here and how
often, when I'm about to come in, I feel a certain type of nervousness and,
I don't know, the, the kind of nervousness I feel when I know I probably am
going to do something that I'll find hard.  And then, afterwards, I'll feel
almost a relief.  But then lately, I just, after that sort of feeling of
relief, I, I just begin to think of all these things, a lot of things.  And
lately, at home I've just felt as if things are just pushing and pulling
inside me.  And I just haven't been sure exactly how I feel about things
and I'll be thinking that I just have to come back tomorrow.  And yes—,
last night I was thinking, "How can I not come back after today until
Monday?"  But then by the morning it's almost as if I've forgotten all
these things that are bothering me or that seem unclear in my mind.  And
yet I know that there's something there.  And I'm just back to the stage of
feeling sort of a nervousness over coming in again.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I was also thinking about the way I seem to now look at how your
expression affects me when I leave.  Because I, I don't, I don't know that
your expression was ever different from any other time but it strikes me
differently, just as these markings on the wall often will look like faces
and, and then will strike me in different ways.  And la—, and yesterday, I
think that I saw your expression as being one of sort of kindness and as if
you had some kind of feeling of caring or sympathy or something.  And it
just made me think that, even more than I have other times, that I'm trying
to make you into some kind of a father figure to me.  Or, I mean, just the
way I wanted you to sort of direct what I do here and, and then I'm trying
to give you emotional reactions to me.  And it also affected me in a
strange way, at least I thought it was strange because I had, at one point
yesterday, felt like crying here and I'd stopped myself.  And then after I
left, and after I saw your expression which affected me that way, then it
just made me feel like crying again.  And I felt that way all night.  And
it surprised me because by the time I'd, the time was over here, I didn't
feel like crying anymore and —</p>

<p>ANALYST: Do you recall what it was yesterday that you were feeling you wanted
to cry about?</p>

<p>PATIENT: (Interrupting) I think it was when I was, when I was talking about how
I compared myself to Dibs in the book and then just thinking about myself
and how I just, I don't know, just don't think that I don't think much of
myself and I don't believe anybody else could.  And thinking just probably,
an extension of that is, sometimes when I am thinking about how old I am, I
just can't believe that I'm 28 because it, I don't feel it at all or feel
whatever I think 28 would feel like.  I just feel very young and uncertain
and insecure and just all the things that I think of as being a child.  And
I, and it, then it puzzles me that I am this old and then it upsets me that
I've lived 28 years and I'm only this way.  And it just seems so wasted. 
And that makes me want to cry too.  (Pause) 
But also, I've thought sometimes why is it that I can't let myself cry
or that I don't want to cry here and, or even at home, sometimes, if I feel
like it.  And I think there, I used to think, well I still do, that I cry
too much and I shouldn't cry so much.  But I know I use tears as a way to
get my way with mscz.  And if I do it a lot, it's more for that reason.  I
might be upset, too, but I think unconsciously I do it more to sort of get
my way.  Or else, if I'm alone the only times I've ever cried is when I
have, in a way, thought to myself, well, maybe if I cry then that will get
rid of this emotion or at least I'll be able to handle it.  And, and so
again, it's sort of using tears in a way.  And it leaves me feeling very
mixed up about crying and what it means.  And I was struck with the part in
the book I'm reading when the, ah, mother of dibs came in the first time
and cried.  And it seemed that the attitude of the, uhm, therapist was that
this a sign that she could become more human and feeling and so forth.  And
I don't know that I can understand how that really is because in a way it
just seems to me it's a lack of control, lack of self-control and that you
can still have self-control and feel.  I don't know, I'm just mixed up
about it.  But last night I felt very strongly that I'd like to be able to
cry in here and I just don't feel I can.  (Silence)</p>

<p>And I was just thinking of the fact that when I was younger and it
seemed to me I cried so much, it was always when I was alone that I'd cry. 
And even if I cried, for instance, in front of my mother I would feel very
peculiar about it.  But I could do that, occasionally.  And then I was
thinking of a time, I don't know what the reason was, but that I cried — I
th—, it might have been in a summer camp — about something and there was
another person there.  And they were just comforting me and I felt very
uncomfortable at it.  And then I responded to this other person's reaching
out to me but I could never let that happen again.  And I think of how I
would be in the other position.  And it's taken me a long time to even feel
that I could comfort another person.  When somebody has been upset I ha—,
I just haven't known what to do with myself, or feeling ill or anything.  I
mean, just putting your arm around them has been very difficult for me. 
(Silence)</p>

<p>It's funny, but there's something about reaching out to other people,
I suppose, in the fact that I find it very hard to call faculty members by
their first name.  Because well, first of all it's making the relationship
much more personal or intimate or something.  And I think I also just can't
think of myself on the same level.  And I never can think of myself as a,
uhm, fellow teacher, I, I somehow will always think of myself as being in a
much more subordinate position and hardly with the right to use their
personal, their first name.  And I think, too the first time you use it, or
the first time I use it, I'm afraid that I'll be rebuffed or something,
that even if they don't show it, they may be thinking, "Well, that's
strange that she's using my first name, she has no right to do that."  Or
"I don't like her doing that."  Or something.  (Silence)</p>

<p>I think the main thing that's been bothering me about all these
various reactions is this feeling of confusion I've had.  It's almost I
don't care what it is I know but I just want to know how I feel about
things or how I see them or what it is exactly I'm feeling.  But this state of confusion and things that aren't quite coming out, m—, reactions that
aren't quite at the surface, or thoughts that aren't quite clear,
distresses me very much.  And I don't really know what to do about it and I
don't know how much of it is that I'm not letting them come out.  But I
find now very often when I go home after being here, I have to eat right
away.  And I don't even care what it is I eat.  And I don't like doing it
but it's just this compulsive eating that — and it's a way to avoid
thinking about things, I suppose.  It's also what I do if I'm working on,
well, lately since I've been teaching, when I'm working on reports for
children.  Or it used to be if I were writing a paper or something, and I
was trying to think in a clear way, then I'd have to eat potato chips or
something like that.  And just, I'd just eat and eat and eat until I
practically got sick on it.  Or I went through a long period when I
couldn't seem to make myself concentrate unless I chewed gum.  (Silence)</p>

<p>I was just thinking about how I feel about crying, again.  And
(analyst coughs) It occurred to me now that I look at it more as just an
admission that I don't have control and therefore it's an admission of some
kind of failure and weakness.  And I, I don't know how much of this is what
makes me feel I can't cry here but I do worry about how I'll look when I
leave and if I'll still be crying when I leave and just, how I can cope
with that part of it.  And I think I worry too about how I'll look when I'm
right here crying and the feeling that I'll look very stupid.  And then
that makes me worry about your reaction to my crying.  Because sometimes
even when I've cried in front of mscz, I've, the thought of how I must look
has almost made me stop.  Because it just seems that you look so ugly and
it's just so unbecoming to an adult.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And thinking that makes me just feel confused again because I don't
feel like an adult.  (Pause) And sometimes I wonder, when I think of how
young I feel or how immature I feel, how I can be teaching and therefore
directing other young children for a time.  And then I'll also think of the
fact that a lot of people younger than I have children and I can't imagine
myself having a child and having the responsibility of another, younger
thing than me.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I, (clears throat) I think when I think of directing children, 2
things bothers me about it, thinking that it's myself directing them.  One
is that I feel how can I know anything, how can I know what's best for them
and what to do.  And particularly with, well, just I suppose in everything
but I'm thinking of teaching of reading right now: it terrifies me that I
might not notice different problems when it's still time to do something
about it and that I might go until the situation is so bad that anybody
could notice it before I'll even see that something's wrong.  But this is
really part of how I see every aspect of what I'm teaching.</p>

<p>And the other thing is that I can see how, despite what I'd like to
do, I will react in ways that I just can't believe I'm reacting in.  And
one of these happened yesterday when I don't know wha—, how I was feeling
exactly, but a boy had done something that we're very strict about their
not doing.  And uhm, I got angry at him.  But I think my anger was stronger
because I was feeling upset about other things, I'm not sure exactly what.</p>

<p>Although I know I, ex—, I was annoyed that my assistant hadn't gone to
handle it because this was happening in a part of the room she was in.  And
I expected that she would hear this and take care of it and she didn't.  So
finally I had to go take care of it and this just increased my being angry
at the boy.  And even at the time, I realized I was angry out of proportion
to what he'd done.  And then he, I asked him to go sit down at his seat and
he left the bathroom.  He was in the bathroom playing and putting paint in
other people's hair and things.  And after he left, I was trying to help
the boy clean up who'd had this happen.  It happened to be the boy who was
so compulsive about everything being picked up.  So in a way it was a good
experience for him but, uhm, —</p>

<p>ANALYST: This was the boy who was putting the paint in, you mean?</p>

<p>PATIENT: No, the boy who was putting the paint in his hair is somebody else.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Oh.</p>

<p>PATIENT: But he was having it put in, he was enjoying it.  I mean, it was a
very social occasion for the two.  But it's just we have to be strict about
their not socializing in that way.  And but still, I was angry out of
proportion to what happened.  And the boy who'd done it left the bathroom
and began to play with some others.  But he was really being sort of mean
to them and teasing them.  He has trouble anyway relating to other
children.  And I know this and I know he needs help but because he hadn't
obeyed me and gone to his seat and been very meek and obedient, I got just
out of control angry at him.  And I knew I was and I knew I shouldn't have
gone near him but I still did.  And I was just raging at him.  And as soon
as I'd started to do it I wished I had, could stop.  And I didn't kn—, I'd
already done it so there was nothing that I could do to get out of it but I
wished I could get out of it.  And it was almost the way, just how my
father used to react to us when we'd do things that bothered him or seemed
to him disobedient or disrespectful, more disrespectful, I suppose.  And I
suppose that's why I was so angry at him, that by disobey—, not being
immediately obedient to me — he was going to be eventually — but by not
doing it immediately in a very submissive way, I took it as a sign of
disrespect to me or sort of my commands didn't have enough weight or
something, I don't know.  But anyway I knew that this rage that I felt had
almost nothing to do with him personally.  And it just horrified me that I
could act in that way.  (Pause)</p>

<p>ANALYST: It's not clear from what you say or, eh, ah, you don't make clear
what you actually did to the boy.  You make clear how you felt but not what
you did.</p>

<p>PATIENT: I suppose I was purposely not doing that because (chuckles) I don't
want you to know.  It seems so shameful, that I did.  I just, well, I put
my hand on him, which I never should have done, and pulled him to a chair
and sat him down.  And I then took my hand off and I didn't do anything
more.  But I really wanted to just beat him I suppose.  And I, I felt —
and then it was just sort of screaming at him.  I don't know how loud I
actually was but I felt as if I were screaming at him.  I was just out of control.  And I, this happened once last year with a, well with 2 children
who had been real problems for me.  And they were just being silly and
anything I said didn't seem to make too much impression on them.  And again
it was a case of, what I asked them to do didn't seem to really matter to
them so therefore I saw them being very disrespectful to me.  And one boy
ha—, was j—, they were just being so goofy and it just made me so furious
that I went up and I took one boy by his shoulders and I started shaking
him.  And he was very close to the wall so his head would hit the wall
every once in a while.  And I didn't really hurt him but it was shocking to
me then, too, that I could even do that.</p>

<p>But it was a very strange thing with that boy because after I did that
— before he had, had paid very little attention to me and after I did that
he was, he didn't freeze up with me as some children will and just kind of
be obedient but be absolutely afraid of you.  And he never was afraid of me
but he was, he was obedient but it was, uhm, more as if he did respect me
and appreciated the fact that I really would treat him in that way if he,
if he didn't obey.  I don't know, it was very peculiar.  I don't think this
is true for this child.  It just happened that it worked out for that other
child.  But even then, it made me feel a little more relieved that he had
reacted that way but it still horrified me too that I could lose that much
control.</p>

<p>And it was the same feeling that I would have sometimes with my
younger sister and brother (clears throat) and really why I kept away I
kept away from them.  Because if they teased me or if anything bothered me
or if they didn't do something I asked them to do, or commanded them to do,
I would get this feeling of rage with them, too.  And it would be so bad
that it would just seem like I could really hurt them terribly if I didn't
keep away from them.  And it's the same feeling I had, I mentioned, one
night, when I started to hit the cat, our cat that had done something wrong
and how I could just go on and on and on.  And I think after I do that I'm
so frightened by the thought of what I could have done, that that's part of
what upsets me so much.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And it's, all this reaction is like how m—, well, just like my
father's reaction.  And it's always when it in—, involves being
disobedient or disrespectful, and not allowing the other person to save any
face at all.  Because I suppose in a way, yesterday that's what the boy was
doing, trying to regain a little feeling about himself.  Because he had
been upset when I scolded him the first time.  And somehow I just feel so
insecure or something about it, that I can't allow that little leeway for
them.  (Pause) And when I get angry like that, and sometimes I get angry
but I haven't touched them and I haven't really said too much, but then
I'll just, but the feeling that I almost was disobeyed or somebody talked
back to me or something leaves me really shaking.  And I can't, it takes me
a long time to get over it.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I think another thing that bothers me in reacting that way is that
it's easy for me to react that way and get them to be very obedient in that
manner but then it's just obeying because of fear.  Because I am bigger and
I can do more and I'm older and I make decisions that are important for them.  And so they have to obey me or please me.  But then it's just this
empty kind of relationship, sort of automatic obedience.  And I don't want
that but somehow, I know what I want but I somehow can't handle it. 
Because in trying to let them feel relaxed and comfortable and free enough
to be themselves, I don't know where to draw the line when they are going
too far.  And so I'll go from probably being way too lenient, to suddenly
coming down on them like a ton of bricks, as I did yesterday.  And this
just probably confuses them all the more.  Or else, it might not be that
I'm being too lenient but I'm afraid I might be.  And then I'm afraid I'll
be just sort of, well, taken for a sucker, I suppose it is, really. 
(Pause)</p>

<p>And I can see, if I, that it really boils down to my feeling of
confidence, that if I could decide what I did want and what I didn't want,
and feel I was right, at least for myself, for the way I teach, that I
could be consistent then and, and these things wouldn't happen.  Or that I
could just judge when they were being out of line and disrespectful or
talking back, and when it was just a natural type of thing for a child to
do and ha—, having nothing to do with me.  I know I take things way too
personally that they do.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And it's funny — I was just thinking about the fact that the, just
about smiling at them and how easy it can make things if you just smile at
them.  And I probably go some days without smiling once.  Or other days I'd
be sort of conscious of wanting to be pleasant with them and everything and
then I'll smile, feeling very false about it.  And it's just once in a
while, when I feel very good about myself and very good about them and I
like them without even thinking about it, and then I'll smile naturally and
it just makes everything so easy.  It makes me think of the little boy
who's so sad.  And sometimes he'll be complaining about something.  And
he's such a sweet boy and, and but so sad.  And I'll just smile at him and
it almost, I don't even have to say anything and then he'll just give this
most wonderful smile.  It's, I don't know, my smiling at him probably made
him feel good but his smiling at me made me feel even better.  (Silence)</p>

<p>That just made me feel sad to think of how it's just 2 sad people,
that here I am so much older than h—, (swallows) than he is and I
practically feel the same way he does, sometimes, I think.  (Pause) And I
can see how, just like I do things as my father, I, in my reaction to the
children, I react just the way my mother is, that when the children are
feeling happy a lot of them will just come up and throw their arms around
you, me or the other, my assistant or some of them like to kiss my hand or
something.  And I'm — of course, it makes me feel very good that they are
feeling happy in this way, although I'm not even sure now whether it's a
good thing or not that they do it.  But I think I let them more because it
makes me feel good than anything else.  And yet I can't do anything back to
them and it, I almost have to make myself just sort of put my arm around
them a little bit or to show any kind of return of emotion.  Not, not, I
don't think I should return any kind of strong emotion because that
wouldn't, that's for a parent, not for a teacher, but just to sort of
indicate I know they're there for a fleeting moment in a personal way, I
find very hard.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And then I am mixed up, anyway, just how much that kind of thing a
teacher should let happen and whether or not I'm sort of using that,
anyway, as an escape from — if I can make up a good theory about why it
should be this way or that way then it's easier for me than if I just let
things happen because that's what's happening.  (Pause) It makes me think
that often when I'm just in the room when they're free to do whatever they
want, and I'm around, if I do talk with them or do anything with them, it's
almost always with some feeling of, well, I should be doing it this way or
this will help him or, I don't know, some principle over, principle over my
head so that it's the guiding thing.  And it's rarely that I'm just with
them, being myself and letting them be themselves and letting us react to
each other however it might happen, without thinking about anything except
for reacting to them.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Well, our time's up.</p>  
