<p>*TEXT-PV010042 Friday 22 November 1968</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>

<p>PATIENT: (Silence) I'm really thinking of, of 3 different things but I, I think
there's a relationship between them.  But I'm not completely sure of what
it is.  One of the things is, after I left yesterday I was aware that when
I looked at you to say goodbye I was looking more to see if you had any
disapproval or disgust or any kind of a feeling of aversion in your eyes
because of what I'd been talking about.  Because to me, I expected that you
would.  And then I was thinking, too, about well, I went to speak to my
supervisor today about, uhm, what I'd heard, ah, regarding the headmaster's
attitude toward our program, just to find out what I should be doing so
that I, I won't continue 1 way and, and find out the end of the year I
shouldn't have.  And I realized that, well, I also, when I went to ask if I
could see her, there was another person going over a problem with an
individual boy.  And I realized that I'm inclined not to take problems to
her at all.  And I never did last year with my other supervisor.  And it's
not that sometimes I don't feel I have them or that I'm, that — I would
like to ask her opinion on how to handle something but it almost just
doesn't occur to me that I can really do it.  And again, I, I, there must
be something in it of not wanting to admit that I can't handle it or that I
don't know.  Or else I — well, there's a certain kind of weakness that I
feel that I don't like feeling.  I was going to say, or else it seems like
I'm sort of in the position of complaining, and that's not quite it.</p>

<p>But I almost have to either say, "what should I do?"  Or, "this is how
I'm doing it."  And, and be told that's fine.  And somehow I find the
talking over and together working out something, difficult.  But I was
wondering if I might be just afraid to admit a weakness and what would she
think if she knew I didn't really know what I was doing, that kind of
attitude.  And then I was thinking of, well, something I did last night in
class after we turned in the, uhm, reports.  I just felt this need to, at
some point, get some kind of reassurance from the professor.  And I didn't
want to do it but I just felt I couldn't leave without speaking to him
about it in some way.  And it was almost as if I wanted to indirectly make
an excuse for myself.  And I even convinced myself that wasn't what I was
doing but I think it must have been.  And that made me sort of angry at
myself.  I felt relieved that I'd done it but I was still angry at myself
for having had to do it.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And it, I don't know, I was just thinking about well, what connection
between what I did in class and the other things, what connection could
there be?  But, and I think well, they all just show I don't have ny
confidence.  But it seems, I seem to be feeling there was something else,
too.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And when I was talking to my, ah, supervisor something else occurred
to me that isn't completely new idea but, uhm, reflects something about me,
I think.  In the pace I set for my class, I take into consideration much
more the child who is at all slow or unable to handle the material or for
some reason is having problems.  And I do this because I'm, well, I feel a
great responsibility for not giving them any kind of an unhappy or bad
attitude toward school and toward their work and toward their own ability. 
So that, in a way, I don't consider the child who can really move quickly. 
And it just seems that I'm seeing in a lot of the children maybe problems
that don't even exist because of my own attitude about myself.  And I
concentrate on this kind of a child because somehow I feel much more
sympathetic with him than I do with the brighter child.</p>

<p>And I won—, last year when I was doing the written reports, I
wondered after a while, how much I was making up problems in the social
area of the child's adjustment because I just seemed to see a problem with
practically every child, in some way or other.  And I, well, I suppose it's
more, I couldn't judge when the problems that I saw were just natural
problems for a 5 or 6 year old and when they were something that needed
attention.  And I have noticed when, and I've heard this is true too, that
teachers tend to concentrate on certain kinds of things or look for certain
kinds of things.  And it does seem I do look for that.  (Silence)</p>

<p>And I think with working with children, too, I I've always found if
the children have been grouped, that I have a hard time keeping up with the
brighter children in what I'm doing in my teaching.  And it's all part of
this lack of understanding on what's happening to them or sympathy for
what's happening to them.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And it seems, when I think about the fact that I'm so worried over
any, I don't know, emotional damage or anything to a child who's unable to
keep up with the pace that the rest of the class should have, then I think
of how I'll do other things which are probably equally damaging and it
won't bother me a bit.  Because just in the way I relate to them I'm so
uneven.  I mean, it bothers me to some extent but still it could be giving
them some kind of a bad attitude or something and, and I won't feel so
disturbed about that.  But for some reason the thought of confusing a child
or, I don't know, moving ahead so he just begins to feel he can't do
anything disturbs me very much.  And I've also found the last 2 years, this
year and last year, that in planning activities I've concentrated a lot on
things that will make a child more aware of himself and, again, feel better
about himself and what he can do.  And it's almost as if I'm trying to find
out about myself that way.  And certainly because I feel that need, I put
much more emphasis on doing that type of activity in the classroom than
perhaps I would otherwise.  (Pause)</p>

<p>I just had the feeling that I'm off the point somehow.  (Laughs) I
don't —</p>

<p>ANALYST: Well, the point you were wondering about was what these 3, eh,
incidents all have in common.  You felt they were related some way, your
feeling, recalling looking at me to see if I was showing some disapproval
of what you had been talking about and your going to your supervisor, I
suppose to see if she disapproved of your teaching methods, then your
teacher, eh, to see what he thought of what you're doing.</p>

<p>PATIENT: (Pause) It really amazes me when, after you said that it just seems,
well, or course! But while I was talking I could see I'd done it in a way
in the, with you and with my teacher at school.  But I had completely kept
from myself that that was what I was doing with my supervisor in, in just
that I was really just seeking some kind of reassurance.  And yet I knew I
was.  (Pause)</p>

<p>But it makes me, uhm, I don't know if angry is the word, but I have a
conflict in myself when I do do this.  I suppose that's why I make myself
think that there's another reason I'm doing it.  Because when I was
deciding to go to see my supervisor there was a definite conflict in me and
I don't know that I made it very clear in my, got it very clear in my mind
what the conflict was.  But I wasn't happy about going to see her.  But I
felt I had to.  Just like I felt I had to see the professor last night and
why I had to look to see what you were thinking.  I suppose I feel angry
because I'd like to feel that I don't care enough so that it becomes almost
a compulsion that I have no control over.  Well, that's not true, that, I
can't say that I have not control over, but that somehow I'm misplacing
what's important.</p>

<p>And this is not something that's new, either, in my thinking but from
this course, I'm very aware that I can't judge when I've made something I
do like, probably because I'm always thinking in terms of what he approves
of.  And so I never really even stopped to think what I do like.  But even
then, when I try to, I just don't feel that I know or that I can judge. 
(Pause)</p>

<p>ANALYST: The thing you leave out in these 3 things is whether or not you
found yourself reassured in the each of the 3 cases.  Did you feel
reassured afterward?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Well, I did when I looked at you because you looked at me the same way
you always do.  (Pause) I felt relieved when I spoke to my professor about
the reports only because I suppose in a way I was indicating to him that I
hadn't, I wasn't sure whether I'd done the right thing.  So that when he
read my report he would have that in mind and not think well, I thought I'd
done the right thing but I was wrong.  But I was very unhappy with myself
for having done that.  And today I was reassured in part because I think I
have, well, just from what I've said about how I won't think of the child
who can move a lot faster, this is a problem that I have and I did realize
it in talking to her and I wouldn't have, probably, otherwise.  But I don't
think that she, well, again, I think I was relieved from having talked to
her but yet sort of annoyed at myself that I had even had that need, that
the things that came out of it — she kept saying that well, she hadn't
really helped me.  And ah, if I had had more self direction she wouldn't
have helped me by what she said, but she did.  And she didn't know how she
had helped me, she, she didn't realize that she had.  And I suppose part of
it was that she did say, you know, "i will back you in what you do as long
as you realize these things"  which she listed.  I mean, she wasn't really
approving or disapproving of me as a teacher but, I don't know, somehow she
just had a very balanced approach to it and I was able to get myself more
in perspective by talking to her.  So from that point of view it was, it
was very good that I had spoken to her.  It's just the need to have done it
in each of these cases, I think, that bothers me and that left me feeling 
somewhat uneasy or unhappy.  (Pause, laughs) 
It makes me think: this morning I wanted to ask MSCZ what he thought I
should do about my boots.  And I would have except he was in a very bad
mood and I knew he'd just get mad at me if I asked that so I didn't.  But I
would have otherwise.  And that's just another part of the same thing. 
Because again I felt very annoyed that I'd wanted to ask it and I was glad
in a way that, well I used as an excuse that he was in a bad mood, really,
not to ask him.  Because I didn't want to.</p>

<p>ANALYST: You chuckled when you said that, when you thought of this.</p>

<p>PATIENT: Well, these boots just seem so stupid to me and I, I don't know, they
just keep coming up.  (4-minute silence) I was thinking about why I had
chuckled and, I don't know, it seemed that I was able to stay, stand back
from myself and look at myself.  And I was, in a way, laughing at myself. 
And then it just, I was just thinking of the fact that very often when I've
thought about feeling better about myself or how a person who does feel
good about themselves must feel, I have thought that it means not doing
these things that are upsetting to you because you didn't do what you
wanted to do or that you feel stupid.  And, I don't know, now I'm thinking
that perhaps sometimes you'll continue to but that you will be able to feel
sort of well, I don't care or, what does it matter, and just enjoy the
aspect of it that can be funny if you can just get away from it a little
bit.  And this is something I'm, I'm not good at doing.  (Pause) Or if I do
do it, it's, uhm, it's not really a natural thing, it's almost as if I've
decided to play the role of a fool.  And that's not really doing it either. 
And it's the same lack of ability to laugh at oneself that my father has
and, and that has often bothered me about him.  (Pause)</p>

<p>I still find this hard to say but I realized yesterday, or at least
yesterday it bothered me when I heard either of our stomachs rumble because
it made me connect it somehow with defecation and all my thoughts that were
going on then.  And although it didn't occur to me when I had been aware
earlier in the year of our stomachs rumbling, it must have been in the back
of my mind then too.  Because I have the same reaction now that I had then
of wanting the noise to stop and not wanting to be aware of it and
pretending it didn't happen when it happens and almost again as if it's a
personal or private kind of a function that shouldn't be shared with
another person.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And whenever I think of anything on this line I always think of my
father and how he always felt such embarrassment or how he just noticed so,
so, so much anything like that and, and obviously felt that it was very
embarrassing.  I mean, just when I think of my grandmother sitting at the
table and she used to have a lot of trouble with her stomach rumbling
during a meal.  And I don't know that my father ever said anything then but
I just, even then, felt his noticing it and being upset at it.  And it was
more that than that it, that my hearing it bothered me.  And I always felt
that I was going somewhere terribly private if I went into the bathroom
when my mother was in there.  And even though it didn't seem to bother her
in the least, it always bothered me.  (Pause) But it's funny because even
though I have this kind of reaction, I hate to shut the bathroom door when
I'm in there for any reason.  (Pause) That's if just MSCZ and I are at
home.  I don't feel that way if there are other people but when it's just
MSCZ and me I, I for some reason feel very strongly about that door being
shut if I'm in there.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I also, if I'm alone and I'm taking a shower, won't, I, well, I
have, I debate whether to shut the door or not.  And I always think of,
uhm, the fact if I shut the door it will keep some, anybody out who might
come into the apartment, and if I leave the door open, which is in a way
what I want to do, then if somebody did come in, they could come into the
bathroom more easily and attack me in the shower.  And I don't know why I
always have this feeling or this image in my mind.  (Pause) Well, I suppose
it's partly because I'm vulnerable in that I'm alone and naked and so I
must, must come from that somehow.  (Pause)</p>

<p>But it's the same kind of sensation that I had after I saw the movie
that had so many dead bodies in it and how I'd feel when I was opening a
closet or going upstairs when it was dark and I had to turn on the lights,
or going into a dark room.  And it's the same feeling I used to have a lot,
too, when I was in my own bedroom and just before I went to sleep I'd lie
there being sure that if I looked at the window long enough I'd see
somebody trying to get in it.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I think in both the case when I'm taking a shower and when I used
to be lying in bed, the kind of attack I always thought of, at least that I
was aware that I was thinking of, was, uhm, somebody having a knife.  And
so I'd always sleep on my stomach because I felt if I, if I didn't know
they were coming, then it wouldn't hurt so much, or, I don't know, again,
sleeping on my back just seemed much more vulnerable.  (Pause) And I think
with the opening up of doors or going into dark rooms, the thing that
bothered me was not just seeing something there.  Because in the movie all
it was they just saw these dead bodies when they opened up closet doors or
went into rooms.  But it was that whatever was there that I wasn't going to
like would jump out at me.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And when I think of something jumping out at me or somebody being
outside my window, I always think of FYC and the fact that she used to love
to jump out at me from behind the door when we were little.  And she
thought it was just hysterical that I'd be so frightened and for some
reason — either I remember or somebody mentioned it afterwards — she once
talked to me about things coming to get one — I don't know whether it was
me in particular — at night.  And it was after that that I recall having
these feelings about things being outside.  And I used to — and again I
don't know whether it's I'm putting it together or somebody told me — but
I used to blame FYC for giving me this feeling.  But I can see now that I
was receptive for whatever it was that she did do and so that really it's
me in the end anyway, that if I hadn't been receptive, what she did
wouldn't have made that much impression.</p>

<p>And I'll still be that way if, if I'm home alone and I've had to go to
bed or if MSCZ's away on a trip.  And if I hear any noise I'll immediately be scared to death and sure that if I watched the shadows long enough, I'll
finally see that somebody's coming into my bedroom.  (Pause)</p>

<p>ANALYST: Well, our time's up.</p>
