<p>*TEXT-PV010043 Monday 25 November 1968</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>

<p>PATIENT: (Silence) 
 
ANALYST: Ah, I did want to mention in case I, so I won't forget it that eh,
we'll be closed the day after Thanksgiving as well as Thanksgiving so I
won't be able to see you Friday.</p>

<p>PATIENT: Mm.  (Pause) I was just thinking about, uhm, the reaction I seem to
have so many Fridays, and I had it again last Friday, and that's of being
sudden—, or not suddenly, but it's almost as if it takes the whole week to
become involved.  And I can't tell if it's because I know I won't be coming
Saturday that it suddenly seems that I can't, I can hardly stand not
coming, there're just so many things that are occurring to me.  Or if it's
really true that everything gets working and then I kind of get out of the
habit, so that by Monday I feel very awkward and, I don't know.  But then I
realized that when I was thinking about it over the weekend, because it was
very much on my mind this weekend, it's almost as if I store things up to
tell here and (c)(c) confess isn't exactly the word for it (c)(c) but, I don't
know, that the important thing about thinking of them is because then I can
tell them here.  And it's not that then I can think about them and become
aware of something when I think of them outside of here.</p>

<p>(Clears throat) And perhaps I am doing that too.  But I was also
thinking of the fact that I will keep myself on a subject sometimes when I
find that my mind wanders to other things.  And I said something about this
to MSCZ and, and, his reaction was that the important thing is to let your
thoughts just go.  I was, I think when I said this to him I was also trying
to make myself stay on something, to think about it at that time.  And I
said and this is what I do often when I'm here, too.  And I just find I
have a hard time keeping on something.  And, uhm, then he made the comment
that it's, the important thing is to let your thoughts go so that you get
the associations.  And then this began to bother me too, because it's
almost as if, if I have any question about anything I'll ask MSCZ how he
does things so that then I know how I should be doing them and that I'm
using him as a guide.  (Pause)</p>

<p>But I, but I have begun to feel more and more that I don't have to
tell him things.  I think at the beginning I felt a need to tell him almost
everything.  I wouldn't tell him everything, but I, I had this need to tell
him about what would happen here.  And, and I don't think I feel that way
quite so much anymore.  And it was beyond it being on my mind; it was not
just because I was thinking of it, saying it to him, but somehow a real
need to let him know.  And I don't know how much this I was part of it, but
it was almost as if, because he had been the one to really want me to come
at the beginning, it was almost as if I wanted his praise or approval. 
And, and if I told him about what I did then it would almost be like he'd
pat me on the back and say, "Well, that's good" and so forth, "You're doing
the right thing" or something like that.  Or, "I'm glad you're going, I'm
pleased." (Pause)</p>

<p>But I had a very funny feeling on Friday when I was here.  And when I
was, right after I left it seemed to me I wouldn't forget what I'd been
talking about, but I can't remember now.  The only thing I can remember is
talking about something that I didn't think I would have the emotional
reaction to that I did.  But I felt quite confused and sometimes almost as
if I were about to cry without any feeling previous to that, that this was
some kind of an emotionally charged subject that I would respond to.</p>

<p>And the feeling seemed to keep on and it was only really today I
haven't felt the same way that — at least all Saturday I felt again this
sort of mixed feeling and being very disturbed about something, but I
didn't know what.  And either Friday night or Saturday night, I think it
must have been Friday night, I had a dream about my brother.  And, again, I
can't remember any of the details and all I do remember is that he was
dead, he had died.  And I think I must have been dreaming about my reaction
to his death, which, in a way, is the same kind of thing that I do
sometimes with my parents.  (Silence)</p>

<p>And I think when I had this dream about my brother I wondered if it
had any connection with the fact that that night I had decided that I would
get myself in the frame of mind so I would want to have intercourse with
MSCZ.  And this is something I do sometimes, sort of.  I won't do it now
but I'll get myself prepared so I won't resist and I can even initiate it
and, and then not resist at another time.  And so, so then the next morning
I was all prepared and it seemed to me I was going to enjoy it.  But then I
just pulled away and (sighs) I don't know, I, I just seemed to find any
excuse I could for not enjoying it or not being able to participate or
finding fault with things MSCZ was doing.  And I don't think I've ever been
as conscious as I was at that time how the whole feeling I have of having
anything touch my vagina is of just something being very raw and, again,
this whole feeling that it's just a wound down there and a cut and open. 
And, uhm, I've felt that way myself when I've had to touch it and I know I
felt that way before when MSCZ's touched it, but I felt more that way, or I
was more conscious of it this time.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And then I would think, well, it must be because of the accident I had
and the fact that I, in a way, recall quite vividly how I felt then,
although in another way I don't.  And then I just wondered, well, maybe I'm
just using that as an excuse too.  Because if I have it all stem from the
accident, then I could say, "Well, that happened and I'm reacting this way
and there's nothing I can do."  And so then I can sort of satisfy myself. 
(Silence)</p>

<p>And I don't know how much I was thinking of all that on Saturday. 
This happened Saturday morning.  But I, I had a headache that just became
increasingly worse and I couldn't figure out exactly why, because it wasn't
that I was so tired.  And then I thought well, perhaps it's because I'm, I
had planned to do some Christmas shopping.  I didn't have time to do very
much.  But any decisions like that always make me feel horrible.  And if
I'm with MSCZ, I'll immediately start complaining about how I don't feel
very well.  Or whether it was because I was thinking about things sort of
unconsciously that had happened and I just felt again so mixed up.  But I did go to choose Christmas cards.  And (clears throat) and I fin—, MSCZ
didn't want to come at all and I finally made him come at the very end,
because I just didn't feel I could make the final choice.  And knowing he
was coming, I felt completely at ease and I was able to, in my own mind,
select the ones I liked the best.  And I had absolutely no trouble.  But if
I had thought I was going to be the one to make the decision then I
wouldn't have been able to do a thing.  (Pause)</p>

<p>ANALYST: When did you z____ — did you notice the headache when you woke up?
</p>

<p>PATIENT: No.</p>

<p>ANALYST: It started later.</p>

<p>PATIENT: It just kind of kept getting worse and worse.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Ah.</p>

<p>PATIENT: I had, I started the day, after I got up, by having to do the laundry
and shopping, both of which I dislike doing.  And I was in a hurry because
I wanted to get in and get some shopping done.  And, I don't know, I'm sure
it was just from tension, although I don't know what kind.  (2-Minute
silence)</p>

<p>It's interesting, I just realized that MSCZ and I had intercourse on
Sunday morning and it was pro—, I don't know, it might have been Saturday
night that I dreamt that about my brother.  But I had all those other
things happening on one day and it's not true.  Because I would have found
I couldn't, just from all the things we had to do while the stores were
still open.  And, and I would have found that a perfect excuse, if nothing
else.  (Pause) And it's funny, I think that this is where I got the feeling
that what I'm doing is sort of confessing.  Because the thing that bothers
me about talking about MSCZ having intercourse with me is, almost as if
I'm, every time it happens I come here and tell you, as if I'm confessing
something.  Which means I must, in some way, think something wrong
happened.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And, again, the reaction that these are details that are practically
the most personal and, and that I'm telling them to somebody.  And also, a
certain feeling of inadequacy on my part that if I were more adequate, we'd
have intercourse more often and that you'll know now how inadequate I am. 
And all these things are sort of in my mind.  (Pause) It's funny, I just
looked at a place that I had noticed a face before, but he hadn't, the face
hadn't been particularly interesting to me that day.  And I just thought it
looked sort of like a monkey or something, I don't know, very long face. 
And today it just caught my eye and it, and it's the one I want to look at
today.  And it, the eyes are very close together and the mouth is sort of
like it's going, "Oh" and it just has a very angry look to it.  And I
almost feel that — it's not looking at me  but I almost feel as if it's
shouting at me.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And just talking about how things look different at different times,
well, it's just amazed me that you can, your state of mind can color how
you see things so much.  Because I was thinking the other day about how at
the beginning I had made some comment about the clothes you wore.  And at
the time everything, it seemed like you were wearing things that were very
daring to me.  And, I don't know, a while after I began to look again, just
because I hadn't noticed that you were wearing anything daring after I'd
said that.  And everything since then has seemed very subdued or, I don't
know, just what other people wear.  And there was nothing out of the
ordinary.  And this surprised me too.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And also how some days things you do, which are exactly the same as
other days, will affect me one way or another.  And, I don't know, it was
one day last week, one thing I didn't say, that I was thinking, was sort of
a feeling of, I don't know what the word would be, almost gratefulness, I
guess, that you treated me the way you did and that you didn't ask
questions sometimes when I was quiet.  Even though in a way I wished you
would, in a way I was glad you hadn't.  And, I don't know, just, I then
thought of you as a very understanding person and somebody who cared about
me.  And then I just noticed on, I think it was Friday, that when I left
you stood way back, near where you sit.  And this hasn't really bothered me
before but it bothered me on Friday, because it almost seemed that you were
trying to get away from me, be as far away as you could be.</p>

<p>But then another time, earlier in the year, I remember thinking that
the room was so small and that I could barely get out of the room without
running into you.  And you were probably standing in the very same place. 
Or it just makes me think of how, if I'm unsure of myself anywhere, how
self-conscious I am about how I move and how awkward I feel, how clumsy. 
And then I do begin to trip over things and run into things and knock
things down.  And if I am confident or at home or not thinking about
myself, then none of these things happen.  (Pause)</p>

<p>ANALYST: When it seemed to you that I was, uhm, trying to get as far away
from you as possible, did you try to explain to yourself why you thought? 
I mean, what reasons did you give yourself?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Well, I think I must have connected it somehow with what I was talking
about and I can't remember what it was.  But I think, I think in a way what
I did was, and this is what's bothered me about my attitude on thinking of
things when I'm not here, I, I just sort of noticed it and thought, "Well,
I'll talk about it on Monday," instead of thinking about it then.  But I
think there was a vague feeling of, as I always feel on Friday, I feel much
more at ease about what I'm doing here and, I don't know, if I'm feeling
much more at ease, then I must feel I'm making a certain overture, or
somehow trying to extend the relationship we have.  I don't know exactly
how to put it, but that I've made a certain commitment of myself and I want
it responded to in a, in a positive way, in a way that I would like to have
it responded to and that therefore your lack of response I took negatively. 
Well, I, I don't think I really thought that all out but (pause) or
because I had such mixed feelings that day, just within myself and I don't
know exactly with what thoughts they were connected, but I might have just wanted to find something to be annoyed at or not like.  Because I can
remember almost, almost as if I knew I was going to be annoyed at it if you
did it.  And I knew you'd do it because that's where you always stand.  And
so I was waiting for you to do it so I could be annoyed or upset or
something.  Although it seemed to me that that was the first time I was
aware of it, after it happened.  (Pause)</p>

<p>But I don't see why I'd want to be annoyed at you for any reason.  But
of course then I don't always see why I want to be annoyed at MSCZ when I
am or why I used to want to be annoyed at my mother when I would be.  And I
know both of those cases have something to do with testing their feeling
toward me, to see if the more awful I am or the fact that I am
continuously, that they still would accept me or want me around or, I don't
know, love me, I guess.  Although I think if I'm thinking about that it's
more in terms of their accepting me, rather than loving me, that they'll
put up with me.  (Silence)</p>

<p>But I don't see why I'd want to be annoyed at you for any reason.  But
of course then I don't always see why I want to be annoyed at MSCZ when I
am or why I used to want to be annoyed at my mother when I would be.  And I
know both of those cases have something to do with testing their feeling
toward me, to see if the more awful I am or the fact that I am
continuously, that they still would accept me or want me around or, I don't
know, love me, I guess.  Although I think if I'm thinking about that it's
more in terms of their accepting me, rather than loving me, that they'll
put up with me.  (Silence)</p>

<p>The other thing that was on my mind all weekend was just, again, the
outcome of that conference I ha—, or the talk I had with my supervisor on
how I personally stand and what I want to do as a teacher.  Because I ha—,
did have the feeling stronger than perhaps ever before that I wanted to
know where I personally stood so that I wouldn't just be saying, "Alright,
then I'll do it this way." Or, "This is the school policy so I'll just do
it this way."  And, I don't know, it just seemed that those would be taking
the easy way out.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And we got into a discussion about this again today because she again
brought up how she was sorry that she hadn't been able to be m—, of much
help.  And, uhm, I guess she really did feel badly because she said she had
had something else on her mind.  And of course, I was still thinking about
myself enough so I can't remember what she said she had on her mind, but it
related to this.  But I do feel better about how I stand on it now. 
(Pause)</p>

<p>But then I was at a meeting today.  And it was on, uhm, the social
studies curriculum.  And throughout the meeting it just seemed to me that a
lot of the ideas being expressed were such obvious things.  And I was kind
of surprised that at a school of LKC's nature that these things would be
just discussed now, but I didn't say anything.  And I think I was quiet for
two reasons: one, that I didn't have the confidence to say anything and
just the embarrassment of having the attention on me would have been too
much.  And also I was afraid that the things I was thinking weren't clear enough so that if I did try to say them I wouldn't be able to state them
clearly and, again, that I'd get all botched up with my lang—, use of
language and just, I suppose, that I would sound very stupid.  So I kept
quiet for both those reasons.</p>

<p>And then afterwards I realized that some of the things were said
because there were a few people there who were very much against changing
anything.  And if I had said anything I would have just jumped in and
perhaps made trouble where people were trying to step around certain
issues, so that they wouldn't just antagonize the people involved.  And I
just never seem to be aware of these nuances at the time of a meeting.  I'm
always becoming aware of them afterwards, when I think back over how things
went.  But I think my reaction to it bothered me mainly because some of the
ideas I had even now I think well, they would have been perfectly good to
bring up, but I just didn't dare to bring them up.  I just felt, well, what
if they aren't really that good?  What if they don't really pertain to what
they're trying to do?  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I also thought that when I came in today there was a girl speaking
with the receptionist.  And as the girl was trying to make the call, I mean
the receptionist was trying to make the call to you, she was just looking
at me.  And it bothered me terribly that she was sort of staring at me. 
And for a long time I couldn't look back.  And then I just decided, well,
this is silly.  And so the next time she began looking at me I just looked
back at her and she immediately stopped.  And it just seems so silly to me
that I'd spent all that time being uncomfortable that she was looking at me
and my not daring to meet her eyes really, to show her that I knew she was
looking at me, if nothing else. (Pause)</p>

<p>In fact, I think often there's something disturbing to me about
meeting eyes with somebody else, that there's too much contact.  Because,
uhm, well, I was thinking just generally when I'm in the subway or anything
and I happen to be looking at somebody and then they look at me, I get very
embarrassed and I'll look right away.  I won't continue to look that way. 
Or, if I meet somebody's eyes who's been looking at me on the subway I will
be equally embarrassed.  But then it just occurred to me that in
conversations I am most comfortable when I'm not looking at the person with
whom I'm talking.  Or I just thought that at the meeting tonight, this
afternoon, I was most comfortable when I was listening if I looked at the
paper that I had put down some notes or at something else and that if I
looked at the person talking and they happened to look at me, I just felt
too much involvement, too much, that it was too much to me only or
something.  And it just made me feel very uncomfortable so I couldn't
really listen to what they were saying.  (Pause)</p>

<p>For some reason it just made me think of something that happened
yesterday afternoon.  Well, really two things just came to my mind.  And
first, when I had said that, it made me think that some time this weekend
I'd had the feeling of feeling something was directed too much just to me
and that in a way I was misjudging the situation, but I couldn't recall
what it was.</p>

<p>And then it just made me think of, uhm, the fact MSCZ and I, when we
were out taking a walk yesterday, ran into a friend of ours in PLH.  And
she's always been somewhat peculiar.  I've never really felt I knew what
was going on in her mind.  And in some ways I think I've been envious of
her because she's always seemed very self-assured and she's very
attractive.  But I'm also going through that need to be very critical of
her, too.  And yesterday she asked us if we could join herself and her
husband at a movie that evening.  And I'd had some things I wanted to do
for today and MSCZ said he had a few things, I don't know if he really did. 
But anyway w-, he, he took the initiative and declined.  And she'd been
quite friendly before that and then after that she just, it seemed to me,
became very strange and started talking about, well, they had other friends
they could ask.  And I know that I found refusing the invitation hard
because it seemed sort of a personal rejection in some way.  And so then I
don't know whether I saw her reaction as having accepted it as a personal
rejection or whether she really was reacting in a very strange way or just
what happened.  But it just made me feel very uncomfortable in that somehow
I had done something wrong and she had disapproved.  And this bothered me
very much.  So then I just began to find things to criticize.  For instance
when she left, we both were walking in different directions but she kind of
started walking off still saying all these socially acceptable things.  It
all sounded very pleasant and were worded beautifully and so forth but she,
she wasn't even looking at us.  For all she knew we could have been walking
in the other direction and paying no attention.  And it just seemed she was
saying them without any feeling whatsoever.</p>

<p>And there is something I do, I think, with my relationship with other
people that, I don't know, I, I get too jealous about it.  Or I'm not sure
how much I give to a relationship, but I seem to expect some kind of strong
devotion or, I don't know exactly what it is, but I seem to have sort of an
idealistic idea about what friendship is.  And I can't, I can't seem to
adjust to all these sort of middle-ground things, that it's more than just
being an acquaintance, but it's not really being friends and sort of the
attitude, well, we can take you or leave you.  And, of course, wanting a
certain type of intensity in the relationship makes me find beginning a
friendship hard too because I just, I don't want to begin one in a way,
because then somehow I have this responsibility toward some kind of an
intense thing.  And it's not that we'd have to be seeing each other very
much but I, there is still some sort of feeling of responsibility.</p>

<p>And I also became aware of another feeling of a type of responsibility
that I don't know whether I really should be feeling or not.  But an
elderly couple who lived in the building we used to live in have just been
evicted.  And it's to do with rent control and so forth.  But they're,
they're quite old and they have their own problems so that having to move
at their age has been very difficult for them.  And they also have lived in
this apartment for a long time.  And I feel that I should be doing a lot
for them or to help them or giving them attention, because I know they want
it very badly.  But they also make me feel too much responsibility for them
so I'll find any excuse not to call them or not to do something.  And I'll
keep saying, "Well, I'll do it tomorrow."  And then the fact that I'm not,
and usually when we get in touch with them it's because they call us, makes me feel very guilty.  Because somehow here are some people in need and I'm
not doing anything.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And then I'll get annoyed at them.  (Pause) But I think it's more —
well, I don't make the distinction in my mind really about responsibility
or duty, but if I do, I think the feeling I have toward them, because they
are elderly and in need and are turning to MSCZ and me in a way, is more
that I have a duty to them, not a responsibility.  Because I think if I
think about the word, responsibility, it means something bigger than duty
and something that just as a human being you'd feel for another human
being.  But this is something different, it's an unpleasant kind of thing
and it, I don't know, duty seems to cover it better.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Well, our time's up.</p>